
----- PÁGINA 1 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
Available online 7 October 2022
0019-8501/© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Proactive customer retention management in a non-contractual B2B setting 
based on churn prediction with random forests 
Theresa Gattermann-Itschert
*
, Ulrich W. Thonemann 
Department of Supply Chain Management and Management Science, Albertus-Magnus-Platz, University of Cologne, 50932 Cologne, Germany   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Analytics 
Customer relationship management 
Machine learning 
Marketing 
Retail operations 
Churn prediction 
ABSTRACT  
Customer churn prediction enables companies to target customers at risk with proactive retention measures. We 
develop a churn prediction model for a non-contractual business-to-business (B2B) wholesale setting and apply it 
in a field study. Our experiment shows that compared to random targeting, contacting the customers with the 
highest predicted churn probabilities reduces churn in the population significantly. We demonstrate that this also 
entails a positive financial impact in terms of revenue development. 
In addition to validating B2B churn prediction and retention in the field, we contribute to the literature by 
identifying the most important features. On top of the common recency, frequency and monetary value features, 
we show that features specific to customer relationship management such as the recency of the last contact with a 
field representative are important. We provide a concept on how to integrate proactive churn management into 
operations by leveraging existing customer care processes.   
1. Introduction 
Building and fostering relationships with customers is a crucial 
success factor for companies. One aspect of customer relationship 
management (CRM) is proactive churn management to identify cus -
tomers at risk of churning and taking appropriate retention measures. 
With recent advances in technology, machine learning classifiers can be 
used to effectively predict which customer are at risk of churning. By 
training on historical customer data, such models learn to identify pat -
terns of customers who churn. A trained model is able to predict the 
future churn probability of current customers. This probability can be 
used to target proactive churn prevention measures. 
There exists a solid body of literature on modeling choices ( Glady, 
Baesens, & Croux, 2009 ; Migu ´eis, Van den Poel, Camanho, & Falc ˜ao e 
Cunha, 2012 ), data pre-processing techniques ( Coussement, Lessmann, 
& Verstraeten, 2017 ; Crone, Lessmann, & Stahlbock, 2006 ), and classi -
fication algorithms ( Verbeke, Dejaeger, Martens, Hur, & Baesens, 2012 ) 
for churn prediction. Models are usually evaluated by testing their 
capability to detect customer churn behavior on historical data and 
various literature exists on how to construct good churn classification 
models. However, literature on actual use of such prediction models to 
carry out targeted retention campaigns in practice is scarce and the re -
sults of only few field experiments have been reported so far ( Table 1 ). 
Burez and Van den Poel (2007) use a churn prediction model to 
identify the customers of a pay-TV company with the highest probability 
to churn. They test three retention measures in the field which all reduce 
the churn rate. Asking customers about their satisfaction achieves the 
largest effect. Ascarza et al. (2017, 2016) investigate proactive churn 
prevention in telecommunications. They do not use churn predictions 
but select customers based on other criteria. For example, they target 
customers that would benefit from changing their plan if their usage 
pattern continues ( Ascarza et al., 2016 ) or customers whose accounts are 
suspended shortly ( Ascarza et al., 2017 ). Ascarza (2018) conducts field 
experiments in the telecommunications sector and regarding profes -
sional memberships. She predicts which customers have the highest risk 
of churning and which customers have the highest sensitivity to the 
retention campaign, demonstrating that both groups do not necessarily 
coincide. Godinho de Matos et al. (2018) use knowledge about the 
customers ’ social network connections to develop proactive churn 
management for a telecommunications company and show that calling 
the friends of likely churners reduces churn. Ringbeck et al. (2019) 
investigate non-contractual relationships in retail. They conduct a large- 
scale field experiment with 400,000 customers, targeting the top 10% of 
customers with the highest predicted churn probabilities in the treat -
ment group. They find that proactive churn management with coupons 
decreases the churn rate and increases revenue. 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: theresa.gattermann@uni-koeln.de (T. Gattermann-Itschert), ulrich.thonemann@uni-koeln.de (U.W. Thonemann).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Industrial Marketing Management 
journal homepag e: www.el sevier.com/loc ate/indm arman 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2022.09.023 
Received 7 September 2021; Received in revised form 26 June 2022; Accepted 25 September 2022   

----- PÁGINA 2 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
135
In the pay-TV and telecommunications industries, contractual re -
lationships are typical whereas in retail, non-contractual relationships 
prevail. The two different types of relationships need to be distinguished 
as they influence how easily churn can be identified. Churn in 
contractual relationships occurs when the contract period ends or the 
customer notifies the company of his or her cancellation of the sub -
scription. Therefore, both the intention to churn and the actual churn 
date can be clearly identified and in most settings, the company has time 
to react and make an effort to retain customers before the relationship 
ends. Non-contractual relationships are not formally defined and 
therefore, churn is more difficult to identify as it does not go along with a 
contract cancellation but with a customer making less or no more pur -
chases with the company. The time window to evaluate such changes in 
customer behavior varies with the expected purchasing frequency. 
Detecting churn in time to react is particularly challenging in non- 
contractual settings which makes developing churn prediction models 
more complex but also highly valuable for companies. 
The studies mentioned above consider business-to-consumer (B2C) 
settings. Data analytics has been used extensively to support CRM in B2C 
settings and has received less attention in business-to-business (B2B) 
settings ( Wiersema, 2013 ) while there is a large potential to support 
managing customer relationships and gain competitive advantages 
( Hallikainen, Savim ¨aki, & Laukkanen, 2020 ). Purchase volumes of B2B 
customers tend to be larger, hence maintaining a good relationship with 
each individual customer is even more important than in a B2C context 
( Rauyruen & Miller, 2007 ). Studies on B2B churn such as Tamaddoni 
Jahromi, Stakhovych, and Ewing (2014) , Chen, Hu, and Hsieh (2015) 
and Gordini and Veglio (2017) focus on building predictive models for 
companies and analyzing their expected impact on retention activities. 
They investigate which models and features are valuable for predicting 
B2B churn but do not conduct a field experiment like the other authors 
stated in Table 1 . Recently, the focus of churn studies is shifting from 
predicting the customers which have the highest risk to leave towards 
additionally considering which customers can most likely be persuaded 
to stay. De Caigny, Coussement, Verbeke, Idbenjra, and Phan (2021) are 
the first to move to prescriptive analytics for a B2B setting by developing 
an uplift model with the goal of identifying the customers for whom 
retention activities have a positive impact. The value of uplift modeling 
lies in increasing the efficiency of retention activities. A drawback is that 
it requires data on how well customers respond to retention activities, 
which might not always be available. In general, the literature on 
retention analytics in B2B settings is scarce ( De Caigny et al., 2021 ). To 
our best knowledge, we are the first study to conduct a field experiment 
in a non-contractual B2B setting, providing practical evidence on the 
benefit of conducting retention activities based on predicted B2B 
customer churn probabilities. This might be due to the fact that 
compared to B2C settings, the number of customers in B2B settings is 
typically small ( Lilien, 2016 ), which makes training a churn prediction 
model as well as running a field experiment more challenging. 
We investigate the B2B relationships of a European convenience 
wholesaler (company). The company sells beverages, tobacco, food, and 
other essential supplies to small convenience stores (customers). Out of 
all active customers, we consider the subset of approximately 5000 
customers who are not tied to master agreements of a chain, but manage 
their sourcing decisions individually. Customers can choose the whole -
saler they order from and can churn without canceling a contract. 
In our study, we develop a machine learning model that predicts 
customer churn with high precision based on features capturing 
customer characteristics and behavior. We identify the most important 
features. Besides known important indicators such as recency, fre -
quency, and monetary value (RFM) ( Buckinx & Van den Poel, 2005 ; 
Fader, Hardie, & Lee, 2005 ), we find that features specific to the B2B 
setting are important, such as the time since the last contact with a field 
representative. 
We evaluate model performance not only on past data, but validate it 
in a field study predicting future churners. We contact customers with 
the highest churn probabilities and compare the actual number of 
churns with that of an approach where customers are contacted 
randomly. 
We find that targeting retention measures based on the model ’ s 
predictions reduces overall churn. Contacting the customers with the 
highest predicted churn probabilities reduces the number of churners in 
the population compared to the control group (random targeting) 
significantly. The revenue development of customers in the treatment 
group is also higher than in the control group, demonstrating a positive 
financial impact for the company. 
2. Case study 
Our research was conducted at a large European wholesale company 
with sales revenue of over 12 billion EUR in 2018. The product segments 
include tobacco, beverages, food and deep-frozen products, electronic 
value (e.g. phone and gift cards) and other daily needs. Since the 
products require different storage temperatures, the company is also 
specialized in logistics. It aspires to function as a one-stop supplier, with 
customers getting all products in one delivery and within 24 h. The 
market is highly competitive with alternative companies offering similar 
product palettes but other delivery concepts. When customers churn, 
they do not notify the company, since they are not bound to a contract. 
Therefore, churn is not straightforward to identify. 
2.1. Customer churn 
In the non-contractual B2B setting that we consider, customers do 
not necessarily stop abruptly to buy from the wholesale company, but 
gradually buy less or reduce the frequency of their orders. Typically, 
churning customers start buying products in a specific segment else -
where and then switch more segments to the competition. In such set -
tings, there is no specific end date of the customer relationship, which 
makes the churn definition particularly challenging. In other studies in 
non-contractual settings, a substantial decrease in purchase volumes, 
known as partial churn, is used to identify customer churn ( Buckinx & 
Van den Poel, 2005 ; Migu ´eis et al., 2012 ; Migu ´eis, Camanho, & Falc ˜ao e 
Cunha, J., 2013 ). Such a drop in sales is also the prediction focus of our 
study, since the wholesale company considers such a customer behavior 
as churn and grounds for retention measures. We use the partial churn 
definition by the company that considers a customer to be a churner, if 
the revenue over three months fulfills two conditions: 
1. In at least one segment, revenue decreased by 50% or more 
compared to the previous three months and 
2. overall revenue decreased by 30% or more compared to the pre -
vious three months. 
Fig. 1 shows the product segments that play a role in identifying 
churn. The analysis is based on customer churn behavior from April to 
June 2019. We focus on the subgroup of independent customers who can 
Table 1 
Previous churn prediction studies using field experiments to analyze retention 
success.  
Authors Industry Relationship Type 
Burez and Van den Poel (2007) Pay-TV Contractual B2C 
Ascarza, Ebbes, Netzer, and 
Danielson (2017) ; Ascarza, 
Iyengar, and Schleicher 
(2016) , Ascarza (2018) 
Telecommunications Contractual B2C 
Ascarza (2018) Professional 
memberships 
Contractual B2C 
Godinho de Matos, Ferreira, and 
Belo (2018) 
Telecommunications Contractual B2C 
Ringbeck, Smirnov, and 
Huchzermeier (2019) 
Retail Non- 
contractual 
B2C 
Our Study Wholesale Non- 
contractual 
B2B  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 3 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
136
decide to buy from a different supplier at any time. We consider cus -
tomers who bought regularly throughout the last year, with a mean 
interpurchase time of at most two weeks and at least one purchase per 
month. On April 1st, 2019, this applies to 4952 customers, out of which 
371 are considered churners. 
Fig. 1 (a) shows that among the 371 churners, 44% have a decrease 
in revenue of 50% only in one segment. 23% of churners exhibit such a 
decrease in revenue in two of the product segments. 33% of churners 
have three or more churn segments. Fig. 1 (b) shows that tobacco is the 
primary churn segment. Beverages, food, and others are also segments in 
which more than 40% of churners decrease their revenue substantially. 
The segments of electronic value and deep-frozen products play a minor 
role in determining churn. 
2.2. Customer retention 
Previous to our field study, the company did not use a churn pre -
diction model. The sales department monitored the revenue develop -
ment of customers and flagged customers with negative trend. These 
cases were discussed in monthly reviews, but there was no established 
process for dealing with churning customers. 
In our study, we establish proactive churn management based on 
churn predictions. For retention actions, we rely on the customer 
communication methods that already exist. Customer relationships are 
managed mainly by phone calls and visits. Phone agents are assigned to 
a region, managing a group of approximately 1000 customers by taking 
orders and responding to complaints. Field representatives are assigned 
to a group of around 100 customers with short geographic distances to 
allow for routes with multiple visits a day. Field representatives main -
tain a close relationship to their customers, solving issues and advising 
on product portfolio and display of goods. 
For retention measures, we introduce a two-staged process. A 
customer suspected to churn is called first and asked about the general 
satisfaction with the company. If the customer appears to be dissatisfied 
and the phone agent shares the churn suspicion, a visit is scheduled. By 
this procedure, unnecessary visits are avoided and only confirmed sus -
picions are dealt with in person. 
3. Churn prediction model 
For selecting the best churn prediction model for our field experi -
ment with the wholesale company, we benchmark three different al -
gorithms ( Section 3.1 ) and use an out-of-period model evaluation 
process ( Section 3.2 ). We give an overview of the features used ( Section 
3.3 ) and the performance measures applied to evaluate the models 
( Section 3.4 ). We select the best model based on the prediction results 
( Section 3.5 ) and analyze feature importances ( Section 3.6 ). 
3.1. Model training and classifier selection 
In Fig. 2 , the process of data collection, feature and label creation, 
model building, and model evaluation is shown. In the first step, we 
collect customer master data and relevant transactional data from 
different sources within the company: invoicing, CRM activities, and 
delivery performance. This data is combined, aggregated and matched 
to individual customers. On customer level, we then derive informative 
features such as order frequency, revenue development, and recency of 
interaction with a field representative. Data from a 12-month period is 
taken into account to calculate the features. The corresponding churn 
label for each customer is derived from the purchase behavior during the 
subsequent 3 months according to our churn definition. In total, the 
required time span for creating a set of features and labels is 15 
consecutive months. 
During model building, we train a churn prediction model which 
classifies customers as future churners or non-churners. For a compari -
son of different classification algorithms, we refer to Verbeke et al. 
(2012) . The most popular choices in churn prediction studies are logistic 
regression, support vector machines (SVMs), and tree models, in 
particular random forests ( De Caigny, Coussement, & De Bock, 2018 ). 
We benchmark all three machine learning techniques and use the one 
with the highest prediction quality for our field experiment. The 
hyperparameters of each classification algorithm are tuned by con -
ducting grid search. For an overview on grid search parameters of each 
algorithm see Appendix A . 
Logistic regression is a common benchmark in churn prediction studies 
( Coussement et al., 2017 ) because it is a well-known technique from 
statistics with low complexity. Samples are classified by fitting a linear 
model and we apply L2 regularization which penalizes the squared 
feature weights to avoid overfitting. Support vector machines (SVMs) aim 
to maximize the distance of samples to the decision boundary ( Vapnik, 
1995 ) so that the trained model can generalize well when classifying 
new samples. The algorithm has been the focus in several churn pre -
diction studies ( Chen, Fan, & Sun, 2012 ; Coussement & Van den Poel, 
2008 ; Lessmann & Vo ß , 2009 ), also in B2B settings ( Gordini & Veglio, 
2017 ). 
Random forests are frequently applied in churn prediction studies 
because of their robustness and low run times compared to other tech -
niques while delivering good predictive results ( Buckinx & Van den 
Poel, 2005 ; Burez & Van den Poel, 2009 ; Coussement & Van den Poel, 
2008, 2009 ). The algorithm classifies by taking the most frequent class 
prediction of a high number of decision trees which are built on boot -
strap samples ( Breiman, 2001 ). Burez and Van den Poel (2009) recom -
mend weighted random forests which perform even better than classic 
random forests in their setting. The technique deals with class imbalance 
by placing more weight on samples from the minority class ( Chen, Liaw, 
Fig. 1. Churn segment analysis for April to June 2019.  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 4 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
137
& Breiman, 2004 ). We therefore use balanced class weights to build a 
weighted random forest model and vary the maximum tree depth and 
the maximum number of features during grid search. Low values for 
both parameters decrease the risk of overfitting by reducing model 
complexity. 
We report results for all three algorithms and select the best per -
forming one. In other studies in the retail and wholesale field such as the 
retail churn prediction study by Ringbeck et al. (2019) who tested 
different algorithms (logistic regression, decision trees, SVMs, neural 
networks, boosted trees, and random forests), weighted random forests 
delivered the best results. In the B2B wholesale industry, Gattermann- 
Itschert and Thonemann (2021) also find that weighted random forests 
outperform other classification techniques. 
3.2. Model evaluation 
For model evaluation, performance is assessed on a test set of unseen 
data. There are two ways to construct such a test set. Out-of-sample 
testing uses a subset of data from the same time period as hold-out 
data. Out-of-period testing uses data from a time period not yet seen 
during training and has gained popularity in churn prediction studies 
( Burez & Van den Poel, 2008 ; Coussement & De Bock, 2013 ; 
´
Oskarsd ´ottir et al., 2017 ; 
´
Oskarsd ´ottir, Van Calster, Baesens, Lemahieu, 
& Vanthienen, 2018 ). It reflects the inherent time shift between building 
a model and applying the model in practice. Since we conduct a field 
experiment using our trained model, this is particularly relevant. We 
therefore evaluate the model with out-of-period testing. 
We offset the testing period by three months to the future so that the 
test label period has not been used to train the model (see Fig. 3 ). For this 
technique, two time slices of data are required, one for training and one 
for testing. A time slice refers to data from a certain time window. 
Transactional data is organized relative to a reference point within that 
window in order to compute the corresponding features and labels. 
Gür Ali and Arıtürk (2014) and Gattermann-Itschert and Thonemann 
(2021) recommend to use more than one time slice of data as training 
data. Fig. 4 illustrates the concept of using multiple time slices for 
training which is referred to as multi-slicing. In our study, we shift each 
time slice by one month and apply multi-slicing, an approach that en -
hances performance compared to using only one time slice. 
3.3. Feature engineering 
For constructing informative features, we rely both on results from 
the literature and on experience from the company business experts. For 
an overview on the features created, see Table 2 . In the following, we 
focus on selected features from the first two groups, highlighting the 
established features and features we created specifically for the B2B 
case. 
3.3.1. Recency, frequency and monetary value 
Several studies in the churn prediction B2C domain suggest using 
features regarding recency, frequency, and monetary value (RFM) ( Bose 
& Chen, 2009 ; Buckinx & Van den Poel, 2005 ; Migu ´eis et al., 2013 ). 
Tamaddoni Jahromi et al. (2014) confirm this in the B2B context when 
predicting churn for business customers of an online fast moving con -
sumer goods retailer. They validate that the frequency of purchases and 
the time since the last purchase are important. 
For calculating RFM features, we use 12 months of transactional data 
from invoicing. We include the recency of the last purchase relative to 
the mean interpurchase time (IPT), the frequency of orders and its co -
efficient of variation. Mean and coefficient of variation of monthly and 
quarterly revenue as well as revenue development in the recent months 
are computed. Quarterly revenue is also evaluated per product segment. 
3.3.2. Features specific for B2B relationships 
We include further features that the company believes to be good 
predictors of churn. Figs. 5-7 show the histograms of selected industry 
specific features for both groups of customers (stayed and churned). 
Customer margin Company experts advised to take the difference 
between recommended selling prices and actual wholesale prices as an 
indicator for the customer margins. Due to confidentiality issues, we 
cannot disclose the actual margins achieved, but can report the general 
distribution ( Fig. 5 a). The average margin among churners is lower than 
that of non-churners. As expected by the employees of the company, 
customers with low margins are more likely to churn and customers with 
high margins are more likely to stay. 
Company margin The company margin can be approximated by tak -
ing the difference between wholesale prices and purchasing prices. The 
company hypothesized that customers with whom the company makes a 
high margin are more likely to churn. However, Fig. 5 (b) shows that the 
average company margin is in fact lower for churners than for non- 
Fig. 2. Process of model training and evaluation.  
Train Features Labels
Test Features Labels
Time
out-of-
period
12 months 3 months
Fig. 3. Training and testing time slices for out-of-period testing.  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 5 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
138
churners. A possible explanation is that customers with whom the 
company earns a good profit margin are also those that are more loyal to 
the company. The relative frequency of churners is especially high in the 
low margin categories. 
Delivery performance In previous company surveys, customers re -
ported delivery performance as a factor of their satisfaction. There is 
insufficient evidence from literature on the importance of features 
capturing delivery performance. For a large Taiwanese B2B logistics 
company, Chen et al. (2015) explore various features regarding delivery 
performance in addition to RFM, longevity and profit variables, but only 
one delivery feature is important enough to be included in the final 
model: number of delivery failures divided by total transactions. They 
conclude that delivery problems only play a minor role in their case 
because the company ’ s service level is very high in general. In our case, 
the wholesale company offers complex multi-temperature logistics 
services and suspected delivery performance to have an effect on churn 
behavior. 
The quantity and product value ordered but not delivered can be 
extracted from the invoicing data source. We also evaluate tracking data 
to determine whether the communicated delivery time window was 
missed. As a combined measure, we compute the ratio of number of days 
with delivery issues divided by the total transactions. Fig. 6 (a) shows 
that the averages are close but lower for churners, contrary to what the 
company expected. 
In line with expectations is the slightly higher average in the ratio of 
product value not delivered divided by revenue, as shown in Fig. 6 (b). 
Judging from these descriptive statistics, the informative value of the 
delivery features seems limited but we still include them in the model for 
potential interaction effects with other variables. 
CRM For a Belgian newspaper company, Coussement and Van den 
Features Labels
Features Labels
Features Labels
. . .
Train
Test
. . .
Mul/g415ple 
time slices
Time
out-of-
period
Features Labels 1 tes/g415ng 
/g415me slice
12 months 3 months
Fig. 4. Time slices for multi-slicing (adapted from Gattermann-Itschert and Thonemann (2021) ).  
Table 2 
Features used in this study.  
Type Feature category Feature variations Source 
Recency, frequency and monetary value  
Recency Interpurchase Time (IPT) Last IPT / mean IPT Invoice data   
Mean, std., coefficient of variation (CV), max Invoice data 
Frequency Number of days ordered Monthly and quarterly mean, std., CV, per segment Invoice data   
X-to-last month / monthly mean, last 1 – 3 weeks Invoice data   
X-to-last quarter / quarterly mean, per segment Invoice data 
Monetary value Revenue Monthly and quarterly mean, std., CV, per segment Invoice data   
X-to-last month / monthly mean Invoice data   
X-to-last quarter / quarterly mean, per segment Invoice data   
Features specific for B2B relationships  
Customer margin Margin recommended selling prices - wholesale prices Invoice data 
Company margin Margin wholesale prices - internal purchase prices Invoice data 
Delivery performance Number of days with missing quantities total, monthly mean, last and second last month Invoice data  
Product value not delivered total, monthly mean, last and second last month, ratio to revenue Invoice data  
Number of days with delivery issues total, early, late, monthly means, ratio to transactions Invoice data, delivery tracking  
On-time in-full (OTIF) total, last, second last and third last month Invoice data, delivery tracking 
CRM Number of contacts with sales representative in person, with phone agent CRM activity log  
Days since last contact with sales representative in person, with phone agent CRM activity log   
Other   
Number of segments ordered from Monthly mean, std., CV, last month / mean Invoice data  
Credit / Debit / Returns total amount / revenue, total days / days ordered, days since last Invoice data  
Region first two digits of postal code Customer master data  
Basic price level conditions of framework agreement Customer master data  
Type of store categorical: convenience shop, beverage shop, tobacco shop, etc. Customer master data  
Length of relationship since customer account creation Customer master data  
Length of framework agreement since latest renewal Customer master data  
Payment method categorical: direct debit, cash etc. Customer master data  
Assigned warehouse different facilities Customer master data  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 6 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
139
Poel (2008) showed that CRM variables such as number and recency of 
interactions are important when predicting churn. Close relationships 
with customers are particularly relevant in B2B settings, so we analyze 
the activity log of both field representatives and phone agents to 
determine the number of contacts in the past 12 months and the days 
since the last contact (set to 365 if no contact was recorded in the past 
year). 
Fig. 7 visualizes that for the customers not contacted for 12 months, 
30%
0%
50%
10%
60%
40%
20%
70%
Customer margin
Rela/g415ve 
frequency
stayed
churned
avgavg
(a)
30%
40%
20%
0%
60%
10%
50%
70%
Company margin
Rela/g415ve 
frequency
stayed
churned
avgavg
(b)
Fig. 5. Histogram of relative frequency for margins of company and customer (stayed/churned).  
0%
20%
5%
10%
15%
25%
Rela/g415ve 
frequency
1.00
Ra/g415o number of days with delivery issues / transac/g415ons
0.800.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.90
avg avg
(a)
30%
40%
0%
50%
10%
20%
60%
70%
80%
90%
0.35
Ra/g415o product value not delivered  / revenue
0.200.10
Rela/g415ve 
frequency
0.00 0.05 0.15 0.25 0.30 0.40 0.45 >0.45
avg avg
stayed
churned
(b)
Fig. 6. Histogram of relative frequency for delivery performance features (stayed/churned).  
30%
0%
5%
10%
25%
15%
20%
35%
Days since last contact with ﬁeld representa/g415ve
Rela/g415ve 
frequency
3500 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 365
stayed
churned
avg avg
Fig. 7. Histogram of relative frequency for days since last contact with field representative (stayed/churned).  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 7 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
140
the relative frequency of churners is higher. For customers with more 
recent contacts ( ≤ 100 days ago), the relative frequency is higher for 
staying than for churning customers. 
3.4. Performance measures 
Classification performance of the churn prediction model can be 
evaluated with measures that are based on the confusion matrix. The 
confusion matrix shows how many customers predicted to be churners 
turned out to be actually churners (true positives: TP) or were non- 
churners (false positives: FP) and how many of those predicted to be 
non-churners were correctly classified (true negatives: TN) or were 
undetected churners (false negatives: FN). The distribution of customers 
into the four fields in the confusion matrix depends on the decision 
threshold. Customers are assigned to the positive class if their predicted 
class probability is above this threshold. 
3.4.1. Threshold-dependent measures 
In practice, only one specific model with a set decision threshold can 
be applied. When choosing how many customers to target and thereby 
setting the threshold, two curves can inform the decision by indicating 
the model performance for different scenarios. Most common is the 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve which displays the trade- 
off between the true positive rate 
 
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
)
and the false positive 
rate 
 
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
)
. For situations such as ours with high class imbal -
ance, the alternative precision-recall curve also has benefits since it 
provides more detail than the ROC curve, especially regarding the per -
formance among top-ranked samples ( Saito & Rehmsmeier, 2015 ). 
Precision 
 
TP
TP + FP
)
indicates the fraction of predicted churners that are 
actually churners. Recall 
 
TP
TP + FN
)
is the fraction of actual churners that 
are correctly predicted as such. The precision-recall curve shows that 
finding more churners (increasing recall) by lowering the decision 
threshold comes with less confidence about churn predictions 
(decreasing precision). 
3.4.2. Threshold-independent measures 
To measure general model capability regardless of a specific decision 
threshold, performance can be summarized by the areas under the 
curves. Hence, we report AUC as the area under the ROC curve and 
average precision (AP) as the area under the precision-recall curve. 
3.4.3. Domain-specific measures 
In the churn prediction domain, a typical approach is to select the 
customers with the highest churn probabilities for retention activities. A 
popular measure is the top-decile lift (TDL) ( Coussement et al., 2017 ; De 
Bock & Van Den Poel, 2012 ; De Caigny et al., 2018 ; Verbeke et al., 
2012 ), which captures how much better a model identifies churners in 
the top decile compared to randomly targeting 10% of the customers. It 
is calculated by dividing precision among the top 10% by the 
prevalence. 
3.5. Prediction results 
We compare performance of random forests, logistic regression and 
SVMs on test data which exhibits a medium churn rate of 10%. Out of 
5155 customers, 512 are churners. Table 3 reports performance of the 
algorithms regarding AUC, AP and TDL measures. We select the random 
forest model as it performs best regarding all three measures. In the 
following, we report more detailed results on the prediction perfor -
mance specifically for this model. 
We evaluate our random forest model by examining the ROC curve 
and the precision-recall curve. Since the wholesale company only has 
limited resources to spend on retention activities, different scenarios of 
contacting 250, 500 or 750 customers with the highest churn proba -
bilities are analyzed. Fig. 8 was used in discussions with CRM managers 
to visualize the trade-off between:  
• How many churners are found and can potentially be retained?  
• How many customers are incorrectly predicted as churners resulting 
in wasted resources?  
• How precise are the predictions determining the effectiveness of 
retention activities? 
Fig. 8 (a) shows that the random forest model with an AUC score of 
0.76 is much more capable than a random model (AUC 0.5). The marks 
represent model performance at the threshold levels corresponding to 
predicting 250 (circle), 500 (square) and 750 (triangle) customers as 
churners. The corresponding marks on the dashed line show how well a 
random model would perform. When contacting 5% of customers (250), 
then by chance also 5% of churners are found. With the random model, 
the TPR and FPR are always as high as the fraction of customers con -
tacted. With the random forest model, a much larger fraction of cus -
tomers can be found when contacting 250 customers (TPR 23%) while 
the FPR is kept very low with 3%. By increasing the number of customers 
contacted to 750, the fraction of churners found is raised to 43%, while 
still maintaining a lower FPR of 11% compared to the random model 
with 15%. 
The AP of the random forest model is 33%. The TDL indicates that 
the random forest model is 3.52 times more precise than a random 
model among the top decile. Fig. 8 (b) allows a closer look at the pre -
cision that goes along with different recall levels. When contacting 250 
customers, a moderate recall level of 23% is achieved while precision is 
very high with almost every second churn prediction being true. 
Increasing the number to 750 targeted customers decreases precision to 
29% but enables finding 219 of the 512 churners (43% recall). 
CRM managers from the company opted for this scenario which they 
considered a good trade-off between the effort to target 750 customers 
and the potential to identify up to 43% of the churners. 
3.6. Feature importances 
Next, we evaluate the importance of the features included in the 
random forest model. For an overview on model interpretability and 
different methods, we refer to Molnar (2020) . We apply the SHAP 
(SHapley Additive exPlanations) method by Lundberg and Lee (2017) . 
The method provides insights both on a local level (per sample) and on a 
global level (across samples). With SHAP, individual predictions can be 
explained by evaluating the impact of each feature value on the model 
output. Overall feature importance can be evaluated with a summary 
plot ( Fig. 9 ), where each point represents the SHAP value for one specific 
feature and sample, with the color indicating the feature value (the 
higher the darker). The features are ordered by descending importance. 
Fig. 9 shows that features from various categories are relevant. The 
three most important features are the coefficient of variation (CV) of 
monthly revenue, the development of revenue in the last month 
compared to the monthly mean, and the days since the last contact with 
a field representative. Also important are the CV of quarterly revenue, 
the recency of the last transaction (last IPT/ mean IPT), and the devel -
opment of revenues (last quarter / quarterly mean). The ranking is in 
line with findings from literature that RFM features are important churn 
indicators. In addition, it shows that variables capturing CRM perfor -
mance such as the third-ranking feature are important. In B2B, close 
Table 3 
Performance of different ML classifiers compared to random baseline.  
Rank Model AUC TDL AP 
1 Random Forest 0.758 3.625 0.331 
2 Logistic Regression 0.739 3.423 0.307 
3 SVM linear 0.736 3.323 0.290 
Baseline Random classification 0.500 1.000 0.099  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 8 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
141
relationships with customers are important and directly link to whether 
a customer stays with the company or not. Also, the margin of the 
company and the length of the framework agreement (time since last 
renewal of basic conditions with the customer) contribute to the pre -
dictive performance. Features regarding the delivery performance such 
as number of days with missing quantities are of marginal importance. 
Fig. 8. Model performance across thresholds and results for classifying 250, 500 or 750 customers as churners. Details in legend: # correct churn classifications / # 
churn classifications (x-axis%, y-axis%). 
Fig. 9. SHAP summary plot to evaluate global importance of features.  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 9 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
142
Several variables regarding the revenue and order frequency in the most 
important segment tobacco are important. 
For individual samples, force plots visualize which features have a 
large impact on the prediction and whether the feature values increase 
or decrease the prediction value. For the CRM department and sales 
representatives, force plots can provide valuable insights on why a 
certain customer has a low or high predicted churn probability. In 
Fig. 10 , we evaluate three examples of customers with a low (a), medium 
(b), or high churn probability (c). 
The first example shows that a low coefficient of variation of monthly 
revenue and only eight days since the last contact with a field repre -
sentative lead to a low predicted churn probability of 0.10 for the spe -
cific customer. In the second example, the customer has a medium 
predicted churn probability of 0.31 because his or her feature values 
have both increasing and decreasing effects. Low revenue and a low 
number of days ordered in the last month compared to the mean are 
indicators of an increased risk to churn. At the same time, the last 
contact with a field representative has been two days ago and the co -
efficient of variation of quarterly revenue is very low. In the third 
example, the churn probability is 0.71 due to many features indicating 
an increased risk to churn. Revenues have dropped and the last contact 
was over seven weeks ago. Only the length of relationship points to a 
very loyal customer. Based on this information, a sales representative 
can contact the customer in order to maintain the relationship. 
4. Experimental setting 
Training a churn prediction model is only the first step in proactive 
customer retention activity. A good model is a requirement, but no 
guarantee for successfully retaining customers. To analyze the effec -
tiveness of basing retention actions on churn predictions, we conducted 
a field experiment with the wholesale company. Our goal was to answer 
the following questions:  
1. Can good predictive quality be maintained when applying the model 
in practice?  
2. Do retention measures based on churn predictions lower the overall 
churn rate?  
3. Do the measures positively influence the revenue development of 
customers? 
We set up a customer retention program integrating established 
customer relationship management processes. The program was 
designed to leverage the work of two groups of employees already 
assigned to customer care and support: Phone agents and field 
representatives. 
Fig. 10. SHAP force plots for three different customers.  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 10 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
143
Fig. 11 shows the steps in this process: Input data is updated with the 
latest transactional data to determine the relevant group of currently 
active and loyal customers and to calculate their features based on data 
from the last 12 months. This data is then fed into the developed model, 
which has been trained before. The output is a prediction of customer 
churn behavior for the next three months. 
Customers are ranked by descending churn probability and the top 
ranked customers are selected. These selected customers are then called 
by phone agents. If the agents confirm the churn suspicion, they initiate 
a field representative visit to the customer. The subsequent measures 
address individual customer needs. They range from resolving issues 
with product shelf life or service to consulting on product range. Both 
the phone agent call and the field representative visit also aim to 
generally strengthen the relationship by increased interaction. 
In Fig. 12 , the timeline of the field experiment is displayed. Almost 
one and a half year of historical data from February 1st, 2018 to June 
30th, 2019 are available for model training. With the time span of data 
available at the time of our field experiment, the training set can include 
up to three time slices. 
The field experiment took place during July, August and September 
2019. For predicting the churn behavior during these months, the latest 
trained model was applied. It was fed with new input data by computing 
features on the last 12 months (July 2018 until end of June 2019). Churn 
predictions were available at the beginning of July, followed by reten -
tion measures. The focus was on the first weeks of July with potential 
consecutive visits. After a period of three months, beginning October 
1st, data on the customer transactions during July, August and 
September 2019 could be extracted to analyze the impact of our field 
experiment on churn behavior. 
5. Experimental design 
Our objective is analyzing the value of using a machine learning (ML) 
churn prediction model to target retention efforts. Customers are split 
randomly into two groups: A treatment group, in which ML-based se -
lection is used to determine the customers to call by decreasing predicted 
churn probability and a control group, in which the same fraction of 
customers is called, but with random selection . Hence, the treatment 
groups do not differ by whether or not customers are called or by the 
fraction of customers that are called, but by the method that is used to 
select the customers to call. This allows to assess the value of developing 
and using a churn prediction model. 
On July 1st, 2019, in total 4920 customers from the subgroup of 
independent customers met the criteria of being active and loyal and 
hence entered the field experiment. The company agreed to investing 
resources for contacting 750 customers, which is a fraction of 15.2% 
customers of the dataset. One third of customers were assigned to the 
random selection treatment and two thirds were assigned to the ML- 
based selection treatment. 
Customers were not aware that they take part in an experiment as 
calls were disguised as customer satisfaction surveys. To ensure proper 
randomization, the assignment of customers to the treatment groups was 
conducted without company involvement. 
In both treatments the same fraction of customers was selected, 
resulting in 250 and 500 calls respectively. In order to prevent biases, 
the full list of 750 customers to call was provided to the company 
without the phone agents knowing whether a customer was selected 
randomly or based on their churn prediction score. Based on the call list, 
the two-step targeted CRM activities took place. 
6. Results and discussion 
Table 4 gives an overview on the number of calls per group and the 
number of visits triggered by confirmed churn suspicions. 
After a three months period, customer data was gathered to deter -
mine churners. Table 5 reports the churn rate for called and not called 
Fig. 11. Customer retention program integrating the churn prediction model with customer support units.  
2018
Feb 1st
Time
2019
Jul 1st
2019
Oct 1st
Train 
Features Labels
Predict Features
Model 
Building
Field 
Experiment
Reten/g415on measures
Features Labels
Features Labels
Fig. 12. Model building and field experiment timeline.  
Table 4 
Descriptive statistics on retention measures.   
Control Treatment  
Random selection ML-based selection 
Number of customers 1640 3280 
Number of calls 250 500 
Number of visits 62 132  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 11 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
144
customers and for the full group. There is a difference between the 
control and the treatment group regarding the churn rates among called 
and not called customers. In the control, the churn rates in the subgroups 
are on a similar level while in the treatment, the churn rate among called 
customers is more than three times higher than among those not called. 
This suggests that the ML-based selection is capable of detecting 
churners. As a result, the churn rate among not called customers is 
reduced to 8.53% compared to 12.73% in the corresponding control 
group. 
In the control group, the churn rate among randomly called cus -
tomers is slightly higher than among those who did not receive a call. A 
possible explanation is that calling customers could trigger churn 
because customers become aware of their usage or satisfaction level, as 
in Ascarza et al. (2016) . However, the difference is not significant. Since 
the group of called customers is much smaller than the group of called 
customers, its churn rate is more sensitive to a randomly elevated 
number of absolute churners. 
In the treatment, the churn rate among called customers is 28.40%. 
This is a sign for high precision of the ML-based selection but the effect 
of the retention activities is unclear. For evaluating how well the 
retention measures succeed at reducing churn, we must compare the 
churn rate in the entire population. Looking at the full groups, the dif -
ference in churn rates between the random selection and ML-based se -
lection is 1.38 percentage points. This can be interpreted as an overall 
baseline uplift of 1.38% when targeting a 15.2% proportion of cus -
tomers with ML-based retention measures instead of random targeting. 
The churn rate difference between treatment and control translates to a 
10.67% reduction from 12.93% to 11.55% in the ML-based selection 
group. 
6.1. Churn prediction 
We next analyze the churn prediction quality of the model. A model 
which shows good performance on historical data does not automati -
cally perform well when applied in practice. 
Since retention measures were initiated based on the churn pre -
dictions, the predictive performance of the model is difficult to assess for 
the entire set of customers considered in the experiment. If retention 
measures are successful, customers are non-churners at the end of the 
field experiment even if they were correctly predicted as would-be 
churners in the beginning. 
We therefore evaluate model performance with two approaches. 
First, we calculate predictive performance on the group of customers 
that is not affected by retention measures: the customers in the control 
group that have not been called. Second, we estimate the relationship 
between predicted probability to churn and actual churn with a 
regression model. 
With the first approach, we consider the 1390 customers that have 
been randomly selected to not be targeted with retention measures in 
the control group. Out of these, 177 customers churned. We then 
consider how well the prediction model would have performed on this 
control subgroup. We rank customers in descending order by their ex 
ante predicted churn probabilities and identify the 212 customers that 
would have been targeted (applying the share of 15.2% targeted cus -
tomers from the overall experiment). Among these customers, 64 are 
true positives, which results in a precision of 30.2% and a recall of 
36.2%. Recall is lower than the value obtained on historical data, but the 
model is successful in delivering the same level of precision. Predictive 
performance is good, considering that we evaluate model performance 
in a real-life setting. 
The second approach to estimate predictive performance is a con -
servative assessment, since we take into account all customers including 
those that have been targeted by retention measures. We estimate the 
churn behavior of customers depending on their predicted churn prob -
ability with the following model and apply logistic regression (Logit) to 
estimate the effects. 
y
i
= β
0
+ β
1
⋅ P
i
+ ε
i
(1) 
P
i 
denotes the predicted churn probability. The dependent variable y
i 
is binary (churn: 1 or non-churn: 0). The results from the Logit model in 
Table 6 Model (1) show that customers with a higher predicted proba -
bility to churn are significantly more likely to churn. The results are in 
line with our previous findings on historical data and on the control 
subgroup of not called customers, indicating that the ML model is able to 
predict future churners well. 
6.2. Churn prevention 
The treatments are designed to facilitate a comparison between 
random retention measures and measures based on the ML churn pre -
dictions. We examine the effect of the treatment with the following 
model: 
y
i
= β
0
+ β
1
⋅ P
i
+ β
2
⋅ T
i
+ ε
i
(2) 
We include an independent variable T
i 
for the treatment and control 
for the predicted churn probability. The coefficient of the treatment 
variable indicates whether being in the ML treatment group has a pos -
itive or a negative effect on later churn. Model (2) of Table 6 shows that 
being in the ML-based selection treatment reduces the probability of 
becoming a churner significantly. 
The coefficient of the treatment indicates, that customers in the ML 
treatment are 15% ( = 100%    e
  0.161 
⋅ 100%) less likely to churn. 
Hence, retention activities based on ML predictions are more successful 
than random targeting. 
6.3. Revenue change 
We analyze whether ML-based proactive churn management also has 
an impact on revenue development. Calls and visits are not retention 
measures that directly affect revenue like coupons or special offers 
would. However, successful retention measures should have a positive 
financial impact for the company. For testing the effect of treatments on 
revenue, we use a suitable dependent variable. Since we cannot disclose 
absolute revenues due to data privacy, we calculate the change of three- 
month revenues per customer R
i
c 
(revenue in next three months divided 
by revenue in previous three months). We estimate the regression model 
Table 5 
Churn rate.   
Control Treatment  
Random selection ML-based selection 
Called 14.00% 28.40% 
Not called 12.73% 8.53% 
Full group 12.93% 11.55%  
Table 6 
Effect of the treatment on churn controlling for the predicted churn probability.   
Dependent variable:  
churn  
(1) (2) 
ML-based selection treatment    0.161*   
(0.096) 
Predicted churn probability 8.564*** 8.582***  
(0.483) (0.483) 
Constant   6.070***   5.973***  
(0.247) (0.253) 
Observations 4920 4920 
Log Likelihood   1636.285   1634.875 
AIC 3276.570 3275.750 
*p < 0.1; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01. 
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 12 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
145
R
c
i
= β
0
+ β
1
⋅ P
i
+ β
2
⋅ T
i
+ ε
i
(3)  
where T
i 
denotes the treatment and and we control for the predicted 
churn probability P
i
. Regression results in Table 7 show that the ML- 
based selection treatment has a significant positive effect on revenue 
development. 
The change in three-month revenue is 4.2 percentage points higher 
for customers in this treatment, meaning that 4.2 percent more of their 
revenue is maintained. For the customers considered in the experiment, 
this translates to over 6 million euros higher revenue for the three- 
month period of the experiment. 
7. Conclusions 
We complement previous literature by building a churn prediction 
model for a B2B wholesale setting with non-contractual relationships 
and conducting a field experiment showing that retention measures 
based on the model ’ s predictions successfully reduce the churn rate. 
Evaluated on historical test data, our random forest model achieves 
an AUC score of 0.76 and a top-decile lift of 3.52. Compared to a random 
baseline model with AUC 0.5 and top-decile lift of 1, our model is good 
at identifying customers that are likely to churn. When basing the se -
lection of customers to target with retention measures on the model 
predictions, the ROC and precision-recall curves can be evaluated. We 
set the decision threshold so that around 15% of customers are targeted 
and achieve recall and precision levels of more than 30%. 
We verify the capability to identify churners not only on historical 
data, but also with a field experiment and find that customers with a 
higher predicted churn probability are in fact more likely to churn. 
Targeting a fraction of around 15% of customers with customer satis -
faction calls and follow-up visits significantly reduces churn when 
selecting customers based on churn predictions compared to random 
selection. In our field experiment, the churn rate in the treatment group 
was reduced to 11.6% compared to 12.9% in the control group. When 
controlling for the predicted probability to churn, we find a significant 
treatment effect of decreasing the likelihood to churn by 15%. The 
retention activities also achieve better revenue developments in the 
treatment group with a 4.2 percentage points higher change ratio of 
three-month revenue. 
7.1. Theoretical implications 
Our research has implications for both churn prediction model 
development and proactive customer retention management. 
First, we contribute to existing literature on churn prediction 
modeling in the retail and wholesale domain. We develop a churn pre -
diction model for a B2B setting and offer new insights into which fea -
tures are relevant in such a setting and how models can be trained when 
the number of customers (samples) is relatively small compared to B2C 
settings. 
In the retail industry, there are several studies on churn prediction 
for B2C relationships ( Buckinx & Van den Poel, 2005 ; Migu ´eis et al., 
2013, 2012 ), but the B2B setting has received little attention, with the 
exceptions of Tamaddoni Jahromi et al. (2014) and Gordini and Veglio 
(2017) , who examine online retailers of fast moving consumer goods 
(FMCG) with business customers as consumers. The studies in the retail 
domain have shown that partial churn can be predicted with RFM fea -
tures (recency, frequency and monetary value). 
Our model includes RFM features as well as features specific to the 
B2B setting. We observe that RFM variables are most important but CRM 
activity logs also contain valuable information, such as the recency of 
the last contact of the field representative with the customer. This 
feature ranks third in terms of importance to our model, which high -
lights how critical a good customer relationship is, especially in a B2B 
setting. Our model performance also benefits from information about 
the margins of both company and B2B customers. We find that there is 
merit in including features based on different data sources and that 
features based on invoicing data and CRM data have a high informa -
tional value. 
Our second contribution is further empirical evidence on the effec -
tiveness of basing retention actions on churn predictions. By conducting 
a field experiment in the B2B wholesale sector, we fill a gap in literature. 
There are only a few field experiment studies on churn in general and to 
our knowledge, none in a B2B setting. In comparison with previous field 
experiment studies, our customer base is substantially smaller. Our 
study shows, that successful proactive churn management is possible 
even in a B2B setting with a few thousand customers. We give evidence 
for both a reduction of the churn rate and better revenue development in 
the treatment group. We believe that developing churn prediction 
models for targeting retention activities also has high potential in 
further B2B cases. 
7.2. Managerial implications 
From a managerial perspective, our results also have important im -
plications. Developing a churn prediction model pays off in multiple 
ways: Firstly, feature importances give insights into the reasons of 
customer churn. Secondly, the ROC and precision-recall curves assist in 
determining an economically viable number of customers to call. 
Thirdly, the identification of customers to target can be highly auto -
mated and integrates well with established CRM retention processes. 
In our setting, there is a positive effect on revenues during the three- 
month period which is analyzed. For the customer base considered, 
these short-term effects amount to over 6 million euros higher revenue. 
Under the assumption, that part of the effect persists and the retention 
measures have a lasting effect on customers in terms of revenue, the 
direct financial impact of proactive customer relationship management 
can be substantial. 
In our experiment, we could reduce the churn rate in the treatment 
group by more than 10%. Since it is much more costly to acquire new 
customers compared to retaining current ones, the company benefits 
highly from lowering their churn rate. To achieve a long-term effect, the 
company plans to quarterly perform proactive churn management ac -
cording to the process outlined in this paper. With churn predictions 
renewed every three months, they repeatedly target customers at risk 
and take retention measures. 
7.3. Limitations 
One limitation of our study is that it relies on data from a one-time 
experiment with one wholesale company. Since customer retention is 
an ongoing effort and requires repeated churn predictions and measures, 
there are methodological questions that arise in connection with it. In 
order to adapt to changing conditions over time, a churn prediction 
model needs to be retrained on updated data. This means that the input 
data can potentially contain customers who have been targeted before. 
Churn prediction quality could worsen if the model is trained on 
Table 7 
Change in 3-month revenue.   
Dependent variable:  
Change in 3-month revenue 
ML-based selection treatment 0.042**  
(0.021) 
Predicted churn probability 0.390***  
(0.106) 
Constant 0.740***  
(0.050) 
Observations 4920 
Log Likelihood   5138.031 
AIC 10,284.060  
*p < 0.1; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01  
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 13 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
146
customers who would have churned but in fact did not because they 
were successfully targeted with retention measures. One option is to 
exclude these customers from the training set, another one is to include 
features capturing whether and how long ago a customer has been tar -
geted and what the churn probability was at that time. Further research 
is needed on how to approach this issue. 
When targeting a random selection of customers in the control group, 
we observed a slightly higher churn rate. While the deviance was not 
significant, further research needs to verify whether this is random or 
whether retention measures can also increase the probability to churn 
for certain types of customers. 
In the treatment group, we target the customers with the highest 
probabilities to churn, but research by Ascarza (2018) and De Caigny 
et al. (2021) shows that these are not necessarily the customers that 
respond most to retention measures or for whom retention activities 
bring the highest value. Further discussion is necessary on how to use 
churn prediction most effectively for churn retention activities. Uplift 
modeling is a promising method that should be investigated in B2B non- 
contractual settings. In our set-up, relying on data from the wholesale 
company, data availability and the overall number of customers limited 
the ability to develop such a model. 
In conclusion, more research is needed in the B2B field, focusing on 
field experiments regarding customer retention measures based on 
traditional churn prediction models as well as uplift models. Our study 
contributes to existing literature by offering new insights and practical 
evidence from a field experiment in a non-contractual B2B setting and 
future studies could investigate how our findings generalize to churn in 
other B2B relationships.  
Appendix A. Details on model training 
Hyperparameter tuning for the classification algorithms such as regularized logistic regression, support vector machine (SVM) and random forest is 
done with a grid search using 5-fold cross-validation. The best performing combination scored by AUC is used for predicting on the test set. See Table 8 
for an overview on the hyperparameter settings depending on the number of features F for grid search.  
Table 8 
Hyperparameters and ranges used during grid search.  
Classifier Hyperparameter Values 
Logistic regression penalty L2 regularization  
solver liblinear  
regularization C [10
  5
, 10
  4
, … , 10
2
]  
class weight balanced 
SVM kernel linear  
regularization C [0.2,0.3, … ,1.2]  
class weight balanced 
Random Forest max. tree depth [3, … , min( F , 15)]  
max. number of features 
[ ̅̅ ̅
F
√
, 2
̅̅ ̅
F
√
, 3
̅̅ ̅
F
√
, min
 
F , 4
̅̅ ̅
F
√ ) ]
min. samples per leaf 2  
min. samples split 2  
number of estimators 200  
class weight balanced  
References 
Ascarza, E. (2018). Retention futility: Targeting high-risk customers might be ineffective. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 55 , 80 – 98 . 
Ascarza, E., Ebbes, P., Netzer, O., & Danielson, M. (2017). Beyond the target customer: 
Social effects of customer relationship management campaigns. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 54 , 347 – 363 . 
Ascarza, E., Iyengar, R., & Schleicher, M. (2016). The perils of proactive churn 
prevention using plan recommendations: Evidence from a field experiment. Journal 
of Marketing Research, 53 , 46 – 60 . 
Bose, I., & Chen, X. (2009). Quantitative models for direct marketing: A review from 
systems perspective. European Journal of Operational Research, 195 , 1 – 16 . 
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine Learning, 45 , 5 – 32 . 
Buckinx, W., & Van den Poel, D. (2005). Customer base analysis: Partial defection of 
behaviourally loyal clients in a non-contractual FMCG retail setting. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 164 , 252 – 268 . 
Burez, J., & Van den Poel, D. (2007). CRM at a pay-TV company: Using analytical models 
to reduce customer attrition by targeted marketing for subscription services. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 32 , 277 – 288 . 
Burez, J., & Van den Poel, D. (2008). Separating financial from commercial customer 
churn: A modeling step towards resolving the conflict between the sales and credit 
department. Expert Systems with Applications, 35 , 497 – 514 . 
Burez, J., & Van den Poel, D. (2009). Handling class imbalance in customer churn 
prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 36 , 4626 – 4636 . 
Chen, C., Liaw, A., & Breiman, L. (2004). Using random forest to learn imbalanced data. 
University of California, Berkeley, 110 , 12 . 
Chen, K., Hu, Y.-H., & Hsieh, Y.-C. (2015). Predicting customer churn from valuable B2B 
customers in the logistics industry: A case study. Information Systems and e-Business 
Management, 13 , 475 – 494 . 
Chen, Z.-Y., Fan, Z.-P., & Sun, M. (2012). A hierarchical multiple kernel support vector 
machine for customer churn prediction using longitudinal behavioral data. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 223 , 461 – 472 . 
Coussement, K., & De Bock, K. W. (2013). Customer churn prediction in the online 
gambling industry: The beneficial effect of ensemble learning. Journal of Business 
Research, 66 , 1629 – 1636 . 
Coussement, K., Lessmann, S., & Verstraeten, G. (2017). A comparative analysis of data 
preparation algorithms for customer churn prediction: A case study in the 
telecommunication industry. Decision Support Systems, 95 , 27 – 36 . 
Coussement, K., & Van den Poel, D. (2008). Churn prediction in subscription services: An 
application of support vector machines while comparing two parameter-selection 
techniques. Expert Systems with Applications, 34 , 313 – 327 . 
Coussement, K., & Van den Poel, D. (2009). Improving customer attrition prediction by 
integrating emotions from client/company interaction emails and evaluating 
multiple classifiers. Expert Systems with Applications, 36 , 6127 – 6134 . 
Crone, S. F., Lessmann, S., & Stahlbock, R. (2006). The impact of preprocessing on data 
mining: An evaluation of classifier sensitivity in direct marketing. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 173 , 781 – 800 . 
De Bock, K. W., & Van Den Poel, D. (2012). Reconciling performance and interpretability 
in customer churn prediction using ensemble learning based on generalized additive 
models. Expert Systems with Applications, 39 , 6816 – 6826 . 
De Caigny, A., Coussement, K., & De Bock, K. W. (2018). A new hybrid classification 
algorithm for customer churn prediction based on logistic regression and decision 
trees. European Journal of Operational Research, 269 , 760 – 772 . 
De Caigny, A., Coussement, K., Verbeke, W., Idbenjra, K., & Phan, M. (2021). Uplift 
modeling and its implications for B2B customer churn prediction: A segmentation- 
based modeling approach. Industrial Marketing Management, 99 , 28 – 39 . 
Fader, P. S., Hardie, B. G., & Lee, K. L. (2005). RFM and CLV: Using iso-value curves for 
customer base analysis. Journal of Marketing Research, 42 , 415 – 430 . 
Gattermann-Itschert, T., & Thonemann, U. W. (2021). How training on multiple time 
slices improves performance in churn prediction. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 295 , 664 – 674 . 
Glady, N., Baesens, B., & Croux, C. (2009). Modeling churn using customer lifetime 
value. European Journal of Operational Research, 197 , 402 – 411 . 
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            

----- PÁGINA 14 -----
Industrial Marketing Management 107 (2022) 134–147
147
Godinho de Matos, M., Ferreira, P., & Belo, R. (2018). Target the ego or target the group: 
Evidence from a randomized experiment in proactive churn management. Marketing 
Science, 37 , 793 – 811 . 
Gordini, N., & Veglio, V. (2017). Customers churn prediction and marketing retention 
strategies. An application of support vector machines based on the AUC parameter- 
selection technique in B2B e-commerce industry. Industrial Marketing Management, 
62 , 100 – 107 . 
Gür Ali, 
¨
O., & Arıtürk, U. (2014). Dynamic churn prediction framework with more 
effective use of rare event data: The case of private banking. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 41 , 7889 – 7903 . 
Hallikainen, H., Savim ¨aki, E., & Laukkanen, T. (2020). Fostering B2B sales with customer 
big data analytics. Industrial Marketing Management, 86 , 90 – 98 . 
Lessmann, S., & Vo ß , S. (2009). A reference model for customer-centric data mining with 
support vector machines. European Journal of Operational Research, 199 , 520 – 530 . 
Lilien, G. L. (2016). The B2B knowledge gap. International Journal of Research in 
Marketing, 33 , 543 – 556 . 
Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S. I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting model 
predictions. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 4766 – 4775). 
https://github.com/slundberg/shap/ . 
Migu ´eis, V., Camanho, A., & Falc ˜ao e Cunha, J.. (2013). Customer attrition in retailing: 
An application of multivariate adaptive regression splines. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 40 , 6225 – 6232 . 
Migu ´eis, V., Van den Poel, D., Camanho, A., & Falc ˜ao e Cunha, J. (2012). Modeling 
partial customer churn: On the value of first product-category purchase sequences. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 39 , 11250 – 11256 . 
Molnar, C. (2020). Interpretable machine learning. https://christophm.github.io/inte 
rpretable-ml-book/ . 
´
Oskarsd ´ottir, M., Bravo, C., Verbeke, W., Sarraute, C., Baesens, B., & Vanthienen, J. 
(2017). Social network analytics for churn prediction in telco: Model building, 
evaluation and network architecture. Expert Systems with Applications, 85 , 204 – 220 . 
´
Oskarsd ´ottir, M., Van Calster, T., Baesens, B., Lemahieu, W., & Vanthienen, J. (2018). 
Time series for early churn detection: Using similarity based classification for 
dynamic networks. Expert Systems with Applications, 106 , 55 – 65 . 
Rauyruen, P., & Miller, K. E. (2007). Relationship quality as a predictor of B2B customer 
loyalty. Journal of Business Research, 60 , 21 – 31 . 
Ringbeck, D., Smirnov, D., & Huchzermeier, A. (2019). Proactive retention Management 
in Retail: Field experiment evidence for lasting effects. Available at SSRN 3378498 . 
Saito, T., & Rehmsmeier, M. (2015). The precision-recall plot is more informative than 
the ROC plot when evaluating binary classifiers on imbalanced datasets. PLoS One, 
10 . 
Tamaddoni Jahromi, A., Stakhovych, S., & Ewing, M. (2014). Managing B2B customer 
churn, retention and profitability. Industrial Marketing Management, 43 , 1258 – 1268 . 
Vapnik, V. N. (1995). The nature of statistical learning theory . New York, NY: Springer .  
Verbeke, W., Dejaeger, K., Martens, D., Hur, J., & Baesens, B. (2012). New insights into 
churn prediction in the telecommunication sector: A profit driven data mining 
approach. European Journal of Operational Research, 218 , 211 – 229 . 
Wiersema, F. (2013). The B2B agenda: The current state of B2B marketing and a look 
ahead. Industrial Marketing Management, 42 , 470 – 488 . 
T. Gattermann-Itschert and U.W. Thonemann                                                                                                                                                                                            